Parkinson's disease (PD) is a long-term degenerative disorder of the central nervous system that mainly affects the motor system.The symptoms generally come on slowly over time. Early in the disease, the most obvious
 are shaking, rigidity, slowness of movement, and difficulty with walking.Thinking and behavioral problems may also occur. Dementia becomes common in the advanced stages of the disease. Depression and
 anxiety are also common occurring in more than a third of people with PD. Other symptoms include sensory, sleep, and emotional problems. The main motor symptoms are collectively called "parkinsonism", or
 a "parkinsonian syndrome".

The cause of Parkinson's disease is generally unknown, but believed to involve both genetic and environmental factors.Those with a family member affected are more likely to get the disease themselves. There is 
also an increased risk in people exposed to certain pesticides and among those who have had prior head injuries, while there is a reduced risk in tobacco smokers and those who drink coffee or tea.The motor symptoms 
of the disease result from the death of cells in the substantia nigra, a region of the midbrain. This results in not enough dopamine in these areas.The reason for this cell death is poorly understood, but involves the 
build-up of proteins into Lewy bodies in the neurons. Diagnosis of typical cases is mainly based on symptoms, with tests such as neuroimaging being used to rule out other diseases.

There is no cure for Parkinson's disease, with treatment directed at improving symptoms. Initial treatment is typically with the antiparkinson medication levodopa (L-DOPA), with dopamine agonists being used once
 levodopa becomes less effective. As the disease progresses and neurons continue to be lost, these medications become less effective while at the same time they produce a complication marked by involuntary writhing
 movements. Diet and some forms of rehabilitation have shown some effectiveness at improving symptoms. Surgery to place microelectrodes for deep brain stimulation has been used to reduce motor symptoms in
 severe cases where drugs are ineffective. Evidence for treatments for the non-movement-related symptoms of PD, such as sleep disturbances and emotional problems, is less strong.

In 2015, PD affected 6.2 million people and resulted in about 117,400 deaths globally.Parkinson's disease typically occurs in people over the age of 60, of which about one percent are affected.Males are more often affected 
than females.When it is seen in people before the age of 50, it is called young-onset PD. The average life expectancy following diagnosis is between 7 and 14 years.



SYMPTOMS:


Parkinson's disease symptoms and signs may vary from person to person. Early signs may be mild and may go unnoticed. Symptoms often begin on one side of your body and usually remain worse on that side, even after
 symptoms begin to affect both sides.

Parkinson's signs and symptoms may include:

 1) Tremor: A tremor, or shaking, usually begins in a limb, often your hand or fingers. You may notice a back-and-forth rubbing of your thumb and forefinger, known as a pill-rolling tremor. One characteristic of Parkinson's
 disease is a tremor of your hand when it is relaxed (at rest).

2) Slowed movement (bradykinesia): Over time, Parkinson's disease may reduce your ability to move and slow your movement, making simple tasks difficult and time-consuming. Your steps may become shorter when you walk,
 or you may find it difficult to get out of a chair. Also, you may drag your feet as you try to walk, making it difficult to move.

3) Rigid muscles: Muscle stiffness may occur in any part of your body. The stiff muscles can limit your range of motion and cause you pain.

4) Impaired posture and balance: Your posture may become stooped, or you may have balance problems as a result of Parkinson's disease.

5) Loss of automatic movements: In Parkinson's disease, you may have a decreased ability to perform unconscious movements, including blinking, smiling or swinging your arms when you walk.

6) Speech changes: You may have speech problems as a result of Parkinson's disease. You may speak softly, quickly, slur or hesitate before talking. Your speech may be more of a monotone rather than with the usual inflections.

7) Writing changes. It may become hard to write, and your writing may appear small.




CAUSES:

In Parkinson's disease, certain nerve cells (neurons) in the brain gradually break down or die. Many of the symptoms are due to a loss of neurons that produce a chemical messenger in your brain called dopamine. When dopamine
 levels decrease, it causes abnormal brain activity, leading to signs of Parkinson's disease.

The cause of Parkinson's disease is unknown, but several factors appear to play a role, including:

1) Your genes: Researchers have identified specific genetic mutations that can cause Parkinson's disease, but these are uncommon except in rare cases with many family members affected by Parkinson's disease. However, certain gene
 variations appear to increase the risk of Parkinson's disease but with a relatively small risk of Parkinson's disease for each of these genetic markers.
 
2) Environmental triggers. Exposure to certain toxins or environmental factors may increase the risk of later Parkinson's disease, but the risk is relatively small.

                          Researchers have also noted that many changes occur in the brains of people with Parkinson's disease, although it's not clear why these changes occur. These changes include:

      *  The presence of Lewy bodies. Clumps of specific substances within brain cells are microscopic markers of Parkinson's disease. These are called Lewy bodies, and researchers believe these Lewy bodies hold an important clue to the cause 
     of Parkinson's disease.

      *    Alpha-synuclein is found within Lewy bodies. Although many substances are found within Lewy bodies, scientists believe an important one is the natural and widespread protein called alpha-synuclein (A-synuclein). It's found in all Lewy
     bodies in a clumped form that cells can't break down. This is currently an important focus among Parkinson's disease researchers.




  RISK FACTORS:

Risk factors for Parkinson's disease include:

 1) Age: Young adults rarely experience Parkinson's disease. It ordinarily begins in middle or late life, and the risk increases with age. People usually develop the disease around age 60 or older.

 2) Heredity: Having a close relative with Parkinson's disease increases the chances that you'll develop the disease. However, your risks are still small unless you have many relatives in your family with Parkinson's disease.

 3) Sex: Men are more likely to develop Parkinson's disease than are women.
Exposure to toxins. Ongoing exposure to herbicides and pesticides may put you at a slightly increased risk of Parkinson's disease.
                      




  COMPLICATIONS:

Parkinson's disease is often accompanied by these additional problems, which may be treatable:

 1) Thinking difficulties: You may experience cognitive problems (dementia) and thinking difficulties, which usually occur in the later stages of Parkinson's disease. Such cognitive problems aren't very responsive to medications.
Depression and emotional changes. People with Parkinson's disease may experience depression. Receiving treatment for depression can make it easier to handle the other challenges of Parkinson's disease.

You may also experience other emotional changes, such as fear, anxiety or loss of motivation. Doctors may give you medications to treat these symptoms.

 2) Swallowing problems: You may develop difficulties with swallowing as your condition progresses. Saliva may accumulate in your mouth due to slowed swallowing, leading to drooling.
Sleep problems and sleep disorders. People with Parkinson's disease often have sleep problems, including waking up frequently throughout the night, waking up early or falling asleep during the day.

People may also experience rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, which involves acting out your dreams. Medications may help your sleep problems.

 3) Bladder problems: Parkinson's disease may cause bladder problems, including being unable to control urine or having difficulty urinating.

 4) Constipation: Many people with Parkinson's disease develop constipation, mainly due to a slower digestive tract.

 5) Blood pressure changes: You may feel dizzy or lightheaded when you stand due to a sudden drop in blood pressure (orthostatic 

 6) Smell dysfunction: You may experience problems with your sense of smell. You may have difficulty identifying certain odors or the difference between odors.

 7) Fatigue: Many people with Parkinson's disease lose energy and experience fatigue, and the cause isn't always known.

 8) Pain: Many people with Parkinson's disease experience pain, either in specific areas of their bodies or throughout their bodies.





  TESTS AND DIAGNOSIS :


  No specific test exists to diagnose Parkinson's disease. Your doctor trained in nervous system conditions (neurologist) will diagnose Parkinson's disease based on your medical history, a review of your signs and symptoms, 
  and a neurological and physical examination.
  Your doctor may order tests, such as blood tests, to rule out other conditions that may be causing your symptoms.
  Imaging tests — such as MRI, ultrasound of the brain, SPECT and PET scans — may also be used to help rule out other disorders. Imaging tests aren't particularly helpful for diagnosing Parkinson's disease.
 In addition to your examination, your doctor may give you carbidopa-levodopa, a Parkinson's disease medication. You must be given a sufficient dose to show the benefit, as low doses for a day or two aren't reliable. Significant
  improvement with this medication will often confirm your diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.
 Sometimes it takes time to diagnose Parkinson's disease. Doctors may recommend regular follow-up appointments with neurologists trained in movement disorders to evaluate your condition and symptoms over time and
 diagnose Parkinson's disease.
 




     STAGES :

      It may be helpful for people with Parkinson's disease and their families to be familiar with some of the ways the disease is described. Experts describe symptoms and stages of the disease differently

      Parkinson's disease sometimes is described as early, moderate, or advanced.

  *Early disease describes the stage when a person has a mild tremor or stiffness but is able to continue work or other normal daily activities. This often refers to a person who has been newly diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.

  *Moderate disease describes the stage when a person begins to experience limited movement. A person with moderate Parkinson's disease may have a mild to moderate tremor with slow movement.

  *Advanced disease describes the stage when a person is significantly limited in his or her activity, despite treatment. Daily changes in symptoms, medicine side effects that limit treatment, and loss of independence in activities of
  daily living are common. A person with advanced Parkinson's disease may have significant problems with posture, movement, and speech





  TREATMENT : 


   Parkinson's disease can't be cured, but medications can help control your symptoms, often dramatically. In some later cases, surgery may be advised.

  Your doctor may also recommend lifestyle changes, especially ongoing aerobic exercise. In some cases, physical therapy that focuses on balance and stretching also is important. A speech-language pathologist may help
  improve your speech problems.

   MEDICATION : 

  Medications may help you manage problems with walking, movement and tremor. These medications increase or substitute for dopamine, a specific signaling chemical (neurotransmitter) in your brain.

  People with Parkinson's disease have low brain dopamine concentrations. However, dopamine can't be given directly, as it can't enter your brain.

  You may have significant improvement of your symptoms after beginning Parkinson's disease treatment. Over time, however, the benefits of drugs frequently diminish or become less consistent, although
   symptoms usually can continue to be fairly well-controlled.

         Medications your doctor may prescribe include:

  Carbidopa-levodopa. Levodopa, the most effective Parkinson's disease medication, is a natural chemical that passes into your brain and is converted to dopamine.

 Levodopa is combined with carbidopa (Rytary, Sinemet), which protects levodopa from premature conversion to dopamine outside your brain, which prevents or lessens side effects such as nausea.


 Side effects may include nausea or lightheadedness (orthostatic hypotension).

  After years, as your disease progresses, the benefit from levodopa may become less stable, with a tendency to wax and wane ("wearing off").

  Also, you may experience involuntary movements (dyskinesia) after taking higher doses of levodopa. Your doctor may lessen your dose or adjust the times of your doses to control these effects.

   Carbidopa-levodopa infusion. The U.S. Food and Drug administration approved a drug called Duopa in 2015. This medication is made up of carbidopa and levodopa. However, it's administered through
  a feeding tube that delivers the medication in a gel form directly to the small intestine.

  Duopa is for patients with more advanced Parkinson's who still respond to carbidopa-levodopa, but who have a lot of fluctuations in their response. Because Duopa is continually infused, blood levels of 
  the two drugs remain constant.

  Placement of the tube requires a small surgical procedure. Risks associated with having the tube include the tube falling out or infections at the infusion site.

  Dopamine agonists. Unlike levodopa, dopamine agonists don't change into dopamine. Instead, they mimic dopamine effects in your brain.

  They aren't as effective as levodopa in treating your symptoms. However, they last longer and may be used with levodopa to smooth the sometimes off-and-on effect of levodopa.

  Dopamine agonists include pramipexole (Mirapex), ropinirole (Requip) and rotigotine (given as a patch, Neupro). A short-acting injectable dopamine agonist, apomorphine (Apokyn), is used for quick relief.

 Some of the side effects of dopamine agonists are similar to the side effects of carbidopa-levodopa, but also include hallucinations, sleepiness and compulsive behaviors such as hypersexuality, gambling and eating.
 If you're taking these medications and you behave in a way that's out of character for you, talk to your doctor.

 MAO-B inhibitors. These medications include selegiline (Eldepryl, Zelapar) and rasagiline (Azilect). They help prevent the breakdown of brain dopamine by inhibiting the brain enzyme monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B). 
 This enzyme metabolizes brain dopamine. Side effects may include nausea or insomnia.

 When added to carbidopa-levodopa, these medications increase the risk of hallucinations.

 These medications are not often used in combination with most antidepressants or certain narcotics due to potentially serious but rare reactions. Check with your doctor before taking any additional medications with 
 a MAO-B inhibitor.

 Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors. Entacapone (Comtan) is the primary medication from this class. This medication mildly prolongs the effect of levodopa therapy by blocking an enzyme that breaks down
 dopamine.

 Side effects, including an increased risk of involuntary movements (dyskinesias), mainly result from an enhanced levodopa effect. Other side effects include diarrhea or other enhanced levodopa side effects.

 Tolcapone (Tasmar) is another COMT inhibitor that is rarely prescribed due to a risk of serious liver damage and liver failure.

 Anticholinergics. These medications were used for many years to help control the tremor associated with Parkinson's disease. Several anticholinergic medications are available, including benztropine (Cogentin) 
or trihexyphenidyl.

  However, their modest benefits are often offset by side effects such as impaired memory, confusion, hallucinations, constipation, dry mouth and impaired urination.
 
  Amantadine. Doctors may prescribe amantadine alone to provide short-term relief of symptoms of mild, early-stage Parkinson's disease. It may also be given with carbidopa-levodopa therapy during the later stages
 of Parkinson's disease to control involuntary movements (dyskinesias) induced by carbidopa-levodopa.

  Side effects may include a purple mottling of the skin, ankle swelling or hallucinations.

         

      SURGICAL  PROCEDURES :

  Deep brain stimulation. In deep brain stimulation (DBS), surgeons implant electrodes into a specific part of your brain. The electrodes are connected to a generator implanted in your chest near your collarbone that sends electrical 
  pulses to your brain and may reduce your Parkinson's disease symptoms.

  Your doctor may adjust your settings as necessary to treat your condition. Surgery involves risks, including infections, stroke or brain hemorrhage. Some people experience problems with the DBS system or have complications
  due to stimulation, and your doctor may need to adjust or replace some parts of the system.

  Deep brain stimulation is most often offered to people with advanced Parkinson's disease who have unstable medication (levodopa) responses. DBS can stabilize medication fluctuations, reduce or halt involuntary movements (dyskinesias), 
  reduce tremor, reduce rigidity, and improve slowing of movement.

  DBS is effective in controlling erratic and fluctuating responses to levodopa or for controlling dyskinesias that don't improve with medication adjustments.

  However, DBS isn't helpful for problems that don't respond to levodopa therapy apart from tremor. A tremor may be controlled by DBS even if the tremor isn't very responsive to levodopa.

  Although DBS may provide sustained benefit for Parkinson's symptoms, it doesn't keep Parkinson's disease from progressing.
   
   



   
    LIFESTYLE AND HOME REMEDIES:


   If you've received a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, you'll need to work closely with your doctor to find a treatment plan that offers you the greatest relief from symptoms with the fewest side effects. Certain lifestyle changes may also help make
   living with Parkinson's disease easier.

        HEALTHY EATING 

    While there's no food or combination of foods proven to help in Parkinson's disease, some foods may help ease some of the symptoms. For example, eating foods high in fiber and drinking an adequate amount of fluids can help prevent constipation 
    that is common in Parkinson's disease.

     A balanced diet also provides nutrients, such as omega-3 fatty acids, that may be beneficial for people with Parkinson's disease.

       EXERCISE 

  Exercising may increase your muscle strength, flexibility and balance. Exercise can also improve your well-being and reduce depression or anxiety.

  Your doctor may suggest you work with a physical therapist to learn an exercise program that works for you. You may also try exercises such as walking, swimming, gardening, dancing, water aerobics or stretching.

   Parkinson's disease can disturb your sense of balance, making it difficult to walk with a normal gait. Exercise may improve your balance. These suggestions may also help:

   Try not to move too quickly.

  Aim for your heel to strike the floor first when you're walking.

  If you notice yourself shuffling, stop and check your posture. It's best to stand up straight.

  Look in front of you, not directly down, while walking.

  Avoiding falls.

   
        In the later stages of the disease, you may fall more easily. In fact, you may be thrown off balance by just a small push or bump. The following suggestions may help:

         Make a U-turn instead of pivoting your body over your feet.
       
         Distribute your weight evenly between both feet, and don't lean.
         
         Avoid carrying things while you walk.
 
         Avoid walking backward.
 
         Daily living activities

         Daily living activities — such as dressing, eating, bathing and writing — can be difficult for people with Parkinson's disease. An occupational therapist can show you techniques that make daily life easier.

    
    


          PREVENTION :


  Because the cause of Parkinson's is unknown, proven ways to prevent the disease also remain a mystery. However, some research has shown that caffeine — which is found in 
  coffee, tea and cola — may reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease. Green tea also may reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease.

   Some research has shown that regular aerobic exercise may reduce the risk of Parkinson's disease.


 


